COSC 301: Operating Systems: Homework 1
---------------------------------------

 * Due Weds, Aug 29 

Overview
--------

A *shell is one of the most important ways of interacting with
a UNIX-like operating system.  A shell provides a command-line
interface with a set of commands to interact with the OS.  The shell
allows a user to run programs and otherwise interact directly with the
operating system.  There are many different shells available for
UNIX-like systems: sh, bash, tcsh, csh, ksh, and zsh are the most well
known ones.  In this lab, you'll get some practice working with a bash
shell and writing simple shell scripts and commands.

In preparation for this lab, you should have read *Learning the Shell*,
located at http://linuxcommand.org/lc3_learning_the_shell.php
Many steps below assume that you've done the reading, but you may still 
need to refer to those pages.

You should also have a working bash shell to use on a Linux
system.  I recommend installing virtualbox (http://virtualbox.org)
and then downloading and installing the virtual machine appliance
available on Moodle.  

Create a file named submit.txt and write answers to the following
questions in that file (which you will submit to Moodle).  You can
use any text editor to write your answers.  Some options for text
editors include vim, emacs, gedit, or nano.


1. You'll see a file named systems.txt in the current folder.
   Change the permissions of systems.txt so that only you can read
   and write to it.  In submit.txt, write the command that you
   used to do so.

2. Make a "shell script" to do the same thing as the last question.
   Edit a file named perms.sh.  Add the following text as the first
   line in the file:

#!/bin/bash

   This line tells the OS that the file is a script written in a 
   language that the program located in /bin/bash can interpret.  
   Include two other lines in perms.sh: one to change the permissions
   of systems.txt (as you did in the previous problem), and another
   line to list the file permissions in order to verify them.
   Lastly, change the file permissions of |perms.sh| so that you have
   execute permission.

   In submit.txt, include the contents of perms.txt, and additionally
   write out the command you used to change the permissions for perms.sh.

3. Now run your fancy shell script perms.sh by typing the following:

$ ./perms.sh

   (Note that the $ just indicates the shell prompt.)

   What does the dot (.) refer to in the above command?  Why do we need
   to use ./ to refer to the shell script?  Write answers to these two
   questions in submit.txt.  




The remaining problems involve constructing "command pipelines".  
You might want to review the page "Greppin' the GNU world" in the reading
for more on pipelines.  For each of the problems below, construct
a pipeline that does what is required, and copy/paste that command
line into submit.txt.  You may need to refer to man pages for
different commands, but you should not have to use any commands
other than grep, wc, ps, awk, sort, uniq, whoami, find, xargs, du, 
and ls (and you may not need to use all these commands).  

Two notes:
  a.  An example pipeline appears next as a way to show you a semi-complex
      command line.  
  b.  The find, xargs, and du commands are potentially only used with 
      the last problem.
  

Example:

     First, an example pipeline that also introduces a few new programs:
     ps, awk, sort, and head.  The following pipeline prints the
     name of the process and the amount of memory consumed for the three
     biggest memory hogs running on the entire system:


        $ ps auxww | awk '{print $5, $11}' | sort -k1 -nr | head -3
   

     Here's what the different components do:

     a. ps will show the status of processes running on the
        operating system; auxww is just an odd option to modify how the
        output of ps looks (see the man page).
     b. awk can be used to pick out specific white-space delimited
        "fields" from a line of text.  In the pipeline above, we just
        print out the 5th (memory consumed) and 11th (process name) fields
        (field numbers start at 1).
     c. The sort does exactly what you think.  The -k1 option says
        to use the first field (memory consumed) as the field to sort on.
        The -n option specifies a numeric sort (as opposed to a
        lexicographic sort).  The -r option is to do a reverse sort.
        Thus, we'll get all the processes sorted from largest memory
        consumer to smallest memory consumer.
     d. head will print out the "head" of a file.  In this case,
        we're not printing the head of a file per se, but rather the
        head of the output from the previous step of the pipeline.  You
        can specify how many lines to print as an option.  Above, we ask
        for the first 3 lines.  (By default, you get 10 lines.)

       See the man pages of these commands for more details.


4. Write a command pipeline to print the number of lines that
   contain the letter 'x' in systems.txt.  (Hint: refer to the Google
   tutorial regarding the wc and grep tools.)


5. Construct a command pipeline to print the number of lines in the
   file systems.txt that *do not* contain the string 'os'.
   (You may need to refer to the man page for grep.)


6. Write a command pipeline to print out all the processes running
   under the current user, sorted from highest memory consumer to
   smallest.

   Restriction: in the command pipeline, don't refer to your username
   directly, but use the whoami program to get it.  (A hint: you can
   use "backticks" (`) around a program name to have the output of
   that program substituted in place.  Try it, and think about how you
   might leverage the power of grep.)


7. Write a command pipeline to print the number of processes
   running as different users on the system, sorted by the number of
   processes, highest to lowest.  Your output should *only* include
   the number of processes and the user name on each line.  That is, 
   if there are 19 processes running as foo and 13 processes running 
   as bar, your output should look like:

   19 foo
   13 bar

   You'll want to use the uniq command to construct this pipeline.  It
   removes any duplicate lines from its input stream, and writes the
   unique lines to its output stream.  See the man page for more
   details.


If you thought that was fun, other good tutorials and tips for bash-happiness
can be found at the following links (and through a good search engine):

  * http://www.hypexr.org/bash_tutorial.php
  * http://community.linuxmint.com/tutorial/view/100
  * http://www.tldp.org/HOWTO/Bash-Prog-Intro-HOWTO.html
  * http://www.tldp.org/LDP/abs/html/
